the World of Baldur’s Gate
Volothamp Geddarm
Abeir-toril (Ah-BEER Tor-RILL), more commonly called Toril, is the name of the orb that Faerûn and the Forgotten Realms are set upon, just as Earth is the orb that Eurasia is set upon. The name is archaic, meaning “cradle of life,” and is rarely used in everyday speech. Abeir-Toril is an Earth-sized planet dominated by a large continent in its northern hemisphere as well as a number of other large landmasses scattered about its surface. This northern continent is called Faerûn in the west, Kara-Tur in the east, and Zakhara in the south. It is the primary purpose of this tome to deal with the western portion of this huge landmass, in particular the region in Faerûn between the Sea of Swords and the Inner Sea, and more particularly the area around the city known as Baldur’s Gate.
Volo? Aye (sigh). I’ve spoken to ye before about his “accuracy”, but he is getting a little better.
Maybe that makes his writing more tolerable. Perhaps.
For years, the lands between Waterdeep, a huge city far north of Baldur’s Gate; bustling Amn to the south; the Sea of Swords to the West; and the Wood of Sharp Teeth to the East have been thought of as the Empty Lands – a vast, stretch of wilderness folk venture into only to get from one place to another. Legends abound of grisly fates that befell unfortunate travelers at the hands of the orcs, trolls, hobgoblins (and worse!) said to infest the area in veritable armies. In recent times the caravans have begun to see a new menace – raiding parties of humanoids who plunder mainly the miners in the Cloud Peak mountains north of Amn. Thanks to both human and bestial predators, the trip has always been dangerous – hence the name Sword Coast. Down through the ages, many folk have dreamed of founding a kingdom in this verdant valley hidden in the moors. The area is littered with the ruins of failed dreams – abandoned villages, empty towers and dungeons – as well as the occasional town,
Elminster
Welcome to the Forgotten Realms and the world of Faerûn! (Fay-ROON). A land of magic and adventure, Faerûn is a continent hugging a larger world, which in turn is the third world of eight orbiting a central sun, which is encapsulated in a crystal sphere within a swirling chaos, which is only one in a myriad of alternate dimensions. But for the races of Toril – for the elves and dwarves and gnomes and halflings and humans – Faerûn is a very important place: it is home.
The Sword Coast
                                              38
39
city, or keep, such as Baldur’s Gate, Beregost, Nashkel, the Friendly Arm Inn, and Candlekeep. This guidebook directs the traveler toward the sights and lodgings in the cities. Those not traveling with a caravan in the Sword Coast are warned to hire escorts of armed, trustworthy adventurers!
Zane* was not far wrong, but the Coast today is also home to one of the two largest and most powerful cities in the region, Baldur’s Gate (the other, far inland, is Iraebor). From its gates south to Amn, the Coast on either side of the Coast Way road is pleasant, verdant farmland. North of the river Chionthar as far as the Way Inn, the land is more sparsely inhabited and more dangerous, but it serves as a hunting range for those who must kill wild game to eat and as homestead for lonely pioneer farmers. Travelers are warned that lawlessness is swiftly dealt with by ready, veteran patrols in the lands held by the nobles around Baldur’s Gate. Throughout the rest of the Coast, the traveler’s best protection is a ready blade and friendly magic close at hand. Brigands, dopplegangers, and kobolds are an ever- present danger. Many brigands stay in roving encampments, living off stolen livestock. From such bases they raid travelers, warehouses, and weak settlements at will, particularly at night or in bad weather. On the other hand, game is plentiful for travelers throughout this region.
*Zane Hellar of Amn, the famous senior cartographer of the Merchants’ League, on describing the coast between Waterdeep and Amn: “Leagues upon leagues of lawless waste, home to pirates and outlaws who prey on those who must go north or south while depending on the Sea of Swords as their guide, keeping it in sight so as not to lose their way.”
– Volo
Map of the Sword Coast

                                               40
41
Candlekeep
I understand your home is Candlekeep, so you probably remember more about it than I do, my friend. All apologies for any errors! -Volo!
This community is ruled by the Keeper of the Tomes, assisted by the First Reader (the second in authority and traditionally the most learned sage of the monastery). There are up to eight Great Readers under these two offices, who are assisted by the Chanter, the Guide, and the Gatewarden. The Chanter leads the endless chant of Alaundo’s prophecies, spelled in this duty by three assistants, the Voices of the North, South and East. The Guide is in charge of teaching acolytes, and the Gatewarden deals with visitors, the security of and supplies for the community, and with the clergy. The central, highest fortress of the Keep is surrounded by a terraced rock garden of many trees. There are rumors of vast dungeons beneath the keep, dating from ancient times, when they were used as burial chambers for the wisest scribes.
This citadel of learning stands on a volcanic crag, overlooking the sea. It is a many-towered fortress, once the home of the famous seer Alaundo, and it preserves his predictions along with all the written records and learning of the Realms that can be assembled. Candlekeep is certainly no tourist resort, but there is a store, a temple, and a fair inn here. The price for most travelers to enter the Keep proper is a book. Those wishing to examine any writing in the Keep’s library must gift Candlekeep with a new tome of no less than 10,000 gp value.
This applies to you as well, even though you called the keep home for many years. The monks make few exceptions, and only their true membership is exempt from the entrance fee. It was apparently Gorion’s influence alone that allowed you free access. Such strict enforcement of a rule is simply not to my tastes. –Volo
Except in rare cases no visitor can remain in Candlekeep for more than 10 days at a time, or enter the monastery less than a month after leaving it. Order in the Keep is kept by the Gatewarden’s five underofficers: four Watchers and the Keeper of the Portal, all five of whom have a force of armed monks as assistants.
Candlekeep Candlekeep
The monks of Candlekeep (who claim to be non- denominational, and call themselves the Avowed) also purchase certain books brought to them and even commission agents in great secrecy to procure writings they desire. Those who wish to browse in the library must normally be sponsored by a known mage of power, so many books given to Candlekeep in payment are minor spellbooks.
The Seekers are the lowest monks. They research and fetch and carry. Above them are the Scribes, who copy out works or compile books to sell from various sources in the library – the chief source of income for the community. Above the Scribes are the Chanter and the Readers. The current Keeper of the Tomes is Ulraunt, a proud and haughty minor mage. The current First Reader, Tethtoril, is often mistaken by visitors for the Keeper because of his intelligent, regal, and sensitive demeanor.
Candlekeep has but one absolute rule: “Those who destroy knowledge, with ink, fire, or sword, are themselves destroyed.” Here, books are more valuable than people.

                                             42
43
Baldur’s Gate
are Entar Silvershield (a high level fighter), Liia Jannath (a powerful wizard), the adventurer known only as Belt (a strong fighter), and Eltan (the commander of the Flaming Fist mercenary company).
This port city is shelter and lifeline for the folk of the Coast. It offers the discerning shopper a wide selection of goods – there are a total of six major inns, six main taverns, seven general stores, six primary temples, and a full-service magic store, along with hundreds of lesser buildings. Baldur’s Gate is a tolerant but well-policed city of merchants, and quiet trade and business are the general order of each day. The Flaming Fist Mercenary Company, over a thousand strong, is based in the city. Every tenth person or so is a member of the Fist or a watch agent (well, spy), skilled in battle and within a breath or two of numerous armed allies. The visitor can freely stroll and shop. The city has a system of magical lamps that provide light to its inhabitants in the evening and the night hours, which is one reason why the crime rate is so low (keeping the merchants and storekeepers happy!)
Buildings in Baldur’s Gate tend to be tall and narrow, with slit windows located high and covered with shutters to block out winter winds and nesting seabirds. Tall among them rises the grandly-spired ducal palace of the four ruling grand dukes, known as the High Hall – a place for feasts, court hearings, and administrative business. Not far from the palace stands the High House of Wonders, consecrated to the deity Gond. It is the by far the largest of the Gate’s three temples. Its spreading eastern wings face the Hall of Wonders, also on Windspell Street, where the more successful of Gond’s inventions are displayed to the public. Not far from the Hall of Wonders, near the Black Dragon Gate, is the Wide. This huge open space is the Gate’s market. It bustles day and night, and is usually “open space” only in the sense that there are no buildings. Temporary stalls, bins, sale tables, and shoppers thronging to them usually crowd shoulder to shoulder. Outside the Wide, Baldur’s Gate lacks colorful landmarks. The ever-present damp discourages the use of banners, open shops, and the like.
The city is named for the legendary sea faring explorer Balduran, who long ago sailed past the elven homeland Evermeet in search of the rich, fabled isles of Anchoromé (pronounced ”Ang-kor-OH-may”). Balduran returned with tales of strange, vast lands across the seas. He also brought back great wealth, and scattered it about his sparsely-settled home harbor, commanding that some of it be spent on a wall to protect against tribal orc and barbarian raids (still a problem in the area, in those long-ago days). Then he set sail again for the wondrous lands he had found. Balduran never returned.
Those wishing to overindulge in drink and in the company of the opposite sex are directed to the Undercellar, a little-known, damp, dark warren of linked cellars entered just off the Wide.
Whatever Balduran’s true fate, his money was spent on a splendid city wall. Within its protection, building went on at a great pace, soon expanding beyond its confines. The wall was built by farmers who put it around their own holdings, excluding the actual harbor from its protection. This allowed them to tax all carts coming up from the docks to the protection of the walled city. The colleagues of Balduran, sea captains to whom the harbor was home, angrily insisted that the gate by which southern trade and the harbor traffic entered the city was ”Baldur’s Gate,” and they refused to pay for entering. The strife ended in the overthrow of the enriched farmers and the seizure of the city (which came to be called Baldur’s Gate) by the sea captains.
These are but a few of the many landmarks of this fine city. For the rest, I refer you to the excellent city map I have prepared for would-be adventurers within Baldur’s Gate. I’ve tried to indicate most of the inns, taverns, stores, and temples there for you, my friends
– Volo
The four oldest captains, their days at sea drawing to a close, turned over their ships to younger sailors, who in turn supported their installation as rulers of the fledgling city. The four called themselves “dukes” as a joke, but the titles proved useful when dealing with other rulers, and they were later glorified by the appellation “grand.” Now called the Council of Four, elected by the populace for life (or until resignation), the present grand dukes
This huge high-pillared stone hall displays the grandest glories of Gond to the faithful and the curious. Its cellars contain replicas of the wonders on display. Folk come from afar to see the marvels here. Many go away thoughtful, determined to create similar devices of their own and save themselves the awesome prices charged by the clergy of Gond. The Hall is dimly lit by enchanted glowing globes and is staffed by ever-watchful priests of Gond. It is crowded with gleaming mechanisms that represent the more successful inventions devised for the greater glory of Gond Wonderbringer, god of artifice, craft, and construction. The High House, its parent temple, faces it across Windspell Street. The Hall has held many marvels over the years. Currently on display are many small devices and a few large pieces. Many of the small devices seem to be locks or strongboxes so devised as
Hall of Wonders – Museum and Shop

                                             44
45
to look like something else, from goblets to statues to chairs.
The larger items include a mechanical scribe, a steam dragon, a pump of Gond, an everlight, a fan chair, and a farseer. Unless one tries to damage, move, or tamper with a device, or states a clear and serious intent to purchase, the priests are usually far too busy fending off ever-present, awe-struck gnomes – who travel to the Hall daily to gawk tirelessly at the wonders there – to speak to visitors. The devices on display in the main Hall are the work of priests, who duplicated original prototypes, and the originals aren’t for sale under any circumstances.
female human hand. The sign is enchanted so that stars wink and slowly drift around the blade. The inn itself is less exciting, but still a good, safe, clean, pleasant place to stay.
Elfsong Tavern
Rowdy or reckless guests are warned, once – and if something else happens, firmly asked to leave. On cold nights, the proprietor, Aundegul Shawn, is happy to talk, but only when his palm is liberally greased with gold.
This tavern is the local watering hole, meeting place, and hiring spot for adventurers. A popular destination for pirates and outlaws on the loose in the Coastlands, it is a place the watch turns a blind eye toward, unless rowdiness and battle erupt. Those wishing to fence stolen goods, hire unusual folk for unrespectable tasks, and hear tall tales of daring adventure often come here early and stay late.
The Blushing Mermaid
The tavern is named for an unusual haunting – a ghostly female elven voice heard from time to time all over the establishment. It isn’t loud, but can be heard clearly everywhere, and is both beautiful and mournful. No one is sure just who the singer is – although it’s clear she’s singing a lament for a lover lost at sea – or how the haunting came to be. No other music is permitted in the Elfsong.
The Mermaid is known up and down the Coast lands as a meeting place in which to conduct illicit business for folk who are dangerous or criminal. It is a noisy, brawling establishment. I can recommend it only to those who go well armed, who know how to use their weapons, and who bring lots of loyal friends with similar skills.
The ground floor is devoted to a taproom that serves melted cheese sandwiches (spiced or unspiced, as you prefer), pickles, and fist-sized twists of dried herring – and drinks of all types, of course. Several dark, twisting stairs lead up to private meeting rooms that can be rented by the candle (the time it takes a short taper to burn down) or an evening. Those with enemies are warned that the dimness on the stairs has concealed many a seeking knife thrust or poisoned hand crossbow bolt.
The Mermaid is a long, low, ramshackle place with a confusing maze of wings, outbuildings, stockaded enclosures, and stables surrounding it on three sides – the better to give cover to those trying to approach or leave unseen, most Baldurians say. It has at least four levels of cellars – many more, some say – and rumors abound of secret passages, or even connections to an underground stream connecting with the harbor.
The bartender has a prediliction to spread potentially useful gossip and rumors, but only when his palm is weighted and some drinks are quaffed. Patrons can – and are expected to – go armed when in the Elfsong, and the known rule is that all beings need to protect their own backs.
Rooms at the Mermaid are low-ceilinged, dingy, and apt to be furnished with mismatched pieces that have seen better days. In general, they are loot-and-salvage pieces that have seen heavy use since their installation here. The visitor will find in the Mermaid an astonishing collection of smooth-tongued, old sea dogs nursing drinks at all hours. Each one is a contact person for this or that cabal, thieving brotherhood, smuggler, mercenary band, fence, panderer, or other shady professional interest. Negotiations with such contacts usually consist of a nasty grin and a case of temporary deafness until at least a few coins are given – whereupon they recall their voice, hearing, and manners, and inquire as to your own fortune. Once satisfied the coins you’ve dropped are of good quality, he’ll tell you what you want
The Blade and Stars
This inn is named for its enchanted signboard, looted from a ruined village in Amn after a long-ago trade war. It’s a large black sign displaying a curved saber held by a delicate, long-fingered
The Blade is a long, tall building with attached stables and kitchens on one side and balconies opening out of upper rooms on the other. Its furnishings are clean and fairly new. There’s a small lounge off the front lobby for guests to meet citizens in. Vigilant stairwatchers on staff keep track of guests’ comings and goings, discouraging street thieves and even dopplegangers, who are a growing problem.
Maybe Volo means the sewers? Not a stream I would much fancy crossing – Elminster

                                               46
47
to know and arrange a meeting, or send you to a contact who can. I report all this secondhand, of course! A stay at the Mermaid is apt to be safe, so long as one avoids battle and does nothing overly insulting or stupid. Beer at the Mermaid is sea ale (thicker and more bitter than most tongues find enjoyable), stout, and a light, golden-hued lager from Mintarn. No wines are available, but one can get whisky strong and smoky enough to strip paint or tar from wood. It brings tears to the eyes of most who drink it, and probably worse things to their insides!
rooms, and excessive rowdiness is not permitted. Drunks often awaken in the morning to find themselves sleeping out back in the hay pile by the kitchen door. The innkeeper is a tall, quiet man with a mane of long, curly black hair and a sword scar that runs from his nose diagonally across one cheek. His name is Nantrin Bellowglyn, and he’s a Tethyrian noble’s retired guard who fled that land when civil strife erupted and his lord was slain.
The Helm and Cloak
Tired travelers on the Coast Way between Baldur’s Gate and Amn often stop in Beregost. Beregost is located just off the road about a day’s travel south of where the Way of the Lion branches off from the Coast Way. This town, while much smaller than Baldur’s Gate, boasts three inns, two stores, a magic shop, a temple, and a decent tavern. It’s within reach of the northern borders of Amn. Merchants of that land often use it as a rendezvous for caravan assembly before attempting the perilous overland runs north to Waterdeep or east to the Sea of Fallen Stars. As a result, this small town gets very crowded at unpredictable intervals.
This grand inn, rooming, and feasting house is favored by those who’ve lots of coins to spare – both citizens of the Gate, who enjoy the dining room, and travelers. There’s even a floor of long-term rental rooms. Most of these are currently occupied by members of the Knights of the Unicorn, romantic adventurers described by a regular patron as elegant buffoons. The Helm is the fashionable place to dine and chat, much favored by those of power. Many an important business deal or alliance has been negotiated in its luxurious alcoves. The Helm avoids the haughty and gaudy, unerringly choosing the best of informal good taste, traditional furnishings, and thoughtful service. Warmed robe and slippers are brought to your room when you’re heard to rise in the morn. There’s also mead (very ordinary) and cinnamon- spiced milk available (hot or cold, as you prefer), but no beer of any sort to be had.
Begun as a farming village under the protection of a school of wizardry, Beregost is now dominated by the Song of the Morning, a major temple to Lathander.
“We’re not running a tavern, here m’lord,” sniffed one of the senior servants to me, when I inquired why - Volo
Three Old Kegs
This cozy timber-and-stone inn has three old kegs hanging from a roof pole in place of a signboard. Those bold or whimsical enough to enter and stay will find one of the best inns in all Faerûn. Everything is comfortable and a little shabby, but the staff is quiet friendly. Where there aren’t paintings, there are bookshelves crammed with old diaries, travel books, collections of ballads and legends, and grand and overblown histories of heroes. Regular patrons snooze and read the days away, rousing themselves from time to time for a glass of wine, mug of broth, or a game of dice, cards, or shove-skittles. Both the wine and the broth are excellent, but they, along with iced water and dark and nutty malt bread, are the only fare to be had in the place. The thick beastskin rugs, paneling, books, and tapestries absorb most sound. The Kegs is a quiet place. Come here for a reasonable and comfortable rest, a haven against the bustle of business or adventure. Patrons are asked to keep their weapons in their
Beregost Beregost
Beregost

                                             48
49
The other point of interest near Beregost is the ruin of Ulcaster’s school. The mage Ulcaster, a conjurer of note, founded his school over 300 years ago – but grew too successful, attracting would-be wizards from all over the Sword Coast. Calishite mages came to fear the school’s power and destroyed it in spell battle, though Ulcaster himself disappeared during the fray and was never found. The school burned to an empty shell, which still stands on a hill east of the town. Local fear of the ruin, which is said to be haunted by spell-casting phantoms, has caused Beregost to expand to the west of the Coast Way road, leaving the hills east to the sheep. On a related note, Beregost has only one tavern, called the Burning Wizard (of course!).
by loyal regulars. It’s a delight to find enough cushions in a room to let one sit up in bed in comfort!
The governor of Beregost is Kelddath Ormlyr. Although there is a five-person town council, the governor’s word is law, and he is a tireless proponent of farming, business, and urban improvement. He is also Most Radiant of Lathander (high priest of the temple), and his temple troops police the town, keeping it safe. In this, he has two powerful allies: the wizard Thalantyr, a conjurer of great repute, and the smith Taerom “Thunderhammer” Fuiruim.
The Red Sheaf
High Hedge
Folk come to the Sheaf for fast service. This inn prides itself on getting you to your room or to a board in the dining room as quickly as possible. If the weather is cold or wet, you’ll find yourself in a warm house robe before a crackling fire just as quickly, with your wet things taken to the warming room behind the kitchen to dry on warmed stone shelves. This is Beregost’s largest inn and is favored by merchants wanting to hold business meetings or sit in quiet.
West of the main settlement of Beregost stands High Hedge, Thalantyr’s estate. Thalantyr is a courtly man who can sometimes be seen walking about the countryside, his long, black staff in hand. Locals say he’s interested in far-off places and things, and is sometimes absent for long periods. Those who’ve seen his abode say that it’s a dark, turreted stone house.
The Jovial Juggler
Thunderhammer Smithy, Armor Maker and Weaponsmith
This inn is on the edge of town, on the west side of the road. Its huge sign depicting a laughing carnival juggler in jester-like garb identifies it instantly. It’s an average roadhouse, but young Beregostans love it – it’s their dancing and drinking club. It outpays Feldeposts for minstrels and other entertainers, and there’s scarcely a night at the Juggler without some sort of loud revelry. In addition there is almost continuous feasting complete with oxen, hogs, and boars roasted whole. Thankfully, all of that’s confined to one wing, so patrons can get some sleep!
Taerom ”Thunderhammer” Fuiruim is a burly giant. His chestnut hair and mutton-chop whiskers are now shot through with gray and white, but his huge hands remain strong and deft. He is a master armorer, and his warmongery equals the best in Faerûn. On several occasions he’s made items for Thalantyr to enspell, and even dwarven smiths admire his work. Taerom keeps over a dozen apprentices busy with all the orders that come his way (mainly from Amn). He fights with a huge iron staff and has been known to slay gnolls with a single blow, but is generally a quiet man. He is not given to leadership, but is respected in town more than anyone else.
The Friendly Arm Inn
The Burning Wizard
This walled hamlet located on the Coast Way several days north of Beregost consists of a stone keep (the inn) with stables, gardens, a horse pond, and caravan wagon sheds. It also shelters a few houses, a large meeting hall with a many-pillared entrance, a small store and magic shop, and a temple to Garl Glittergold, chief god of the gnomes. The Friendly Arm was once the hold of an evil priest of Bhaal who was destroyed in undead form by a band of adventurers led by the gnome thief and illusionist Bentley Mirrorshade. Bentley set his comrades-at-arms to work renovating the keep, and it soon opened as a fortified waystop on the Coast Way in territory often endangered by brigands and raiding bands of
This tavern is a bustling place, favored by the locals and visitors. Acolytes of Lathander are trained to keep lively conversations and entertainments going here. This is a good little place, with several small rooms adorned with bric-a-brac donated
Feldepost’s Inn
Named for its now-deceased founder, this is an old and comfortable place. Service is careful and kind, if a trifle slow, but a room comes with a fire alight (except in hot weather), and a warm bath that is filled by several old men of many smiles but few words. The food is superior. Don’t miss the cheese and cucumber buns, or the onion and mushroom tarts served by the hearth in the evenings. (The tarts are free if you’re ordering drinks). The inn cellar includes an excellent sherry.

                                              50
51
orcs, kobolds, bug-bears, and trolls. Though these perils have lessened somewhat since the Arm was founded, the safe, clean inn is still a favorite stop.
Power Groups of the Sword Coast
The Temple of Wisdom
In addition to the various cities and towns, there are a number of other powers within the Realms, all operating to their own ends, and often ignoring national boundaries. These are secret societies, cults, and adventuring companies that seek to put forward their own agenda to further their cause.
This low building has interior walls studded with gems and gold nuggets. Guarded by many illusions, it is a temple to Garl Glittergold, primary deity of the gnomes. Human worshipers, some of whom have dubbed the place the Shrine of the Short, are welcomed here.
The Friendly Arm
The Harpers
Inside the walls of the Friendly Arm, peace is maintained by a common agreement among guests that this be one of the rare neutral havens in the Realms. Of course, there is always the magic and adventuring help Bentley can call on, and the rumor that some of the fetching barmaids are really iron golems concealed by powerful illusions! I was unable to confirm this belief beyond learning that one serving wench has a grip like iron – before she threw me back out of the bedroom she was tidying! (Perhaps the inn was named after her. She did help me up afterward.) The energetic, and affable hosts of the Arm are Bentley and his wife Gellana (who also presides over the temple). The pair are kind, perceptive, and could probably deal an Amnian merchant out of his last copper piece – no small task! The house they keep has large, airy rooms, and good, simple food. Everything is clean, cheerful, and uncrowded – unless there’s a meeting going on – the Arm has become a favorite spot for business gatherings and negotiations alike.
The Harpers are a semi–secret society based in the Heartlands, The Harpers have seen a number of incarnations through the years, with rising and falling levels of political power. They are primarily a group that is allied with a number of good churches, and are receiving support from powerful neutral parties, including druidic circles. Their aim is to keep the dangers to civilization at bay, including goblin raids, dragon flights, and the insidious control of other groups such as the Zhentarim, Red Wizards, the Commer, or the Cult of the Dragon. They believe in the power of individuals, the balance between the wild and the civilized, and the good of humankind and its allied sentient races. They also believe in preserving the tales of the past, so that one may learn from those tales for the future. The Harpers attract a wide variety of character types, but this society is most attractive to elves, rangers, and bards. Harpers are spread throughout the North and the Heartlands, often operating in secret. They are by their nature meddlers, and often operate alone or in small groups to achieve their ends, Except when battling long-term foes, it is unimportant to them if their name is connected with their actions (their own tales and songs are another matter). The Harpers are an amorphous organization, and as such have no main base of operations. The Harpers are a force of good in the Realms, and good-aligned characters may find themselves being aided by unseen allies if their business aids the organization. The only hint as to these allies’ identity is the harp and moon symbol of the group.
Nashkel
South of Beregost and north of the Cloudpeak mountains is the village of Nashkel. Rumor is that it’s a nice place, but I haven’t had time to visit there myself. I have heard that it’s a little smaller than Beregost, but has a temple, an inn, two stores (one reputed to sell some magical goods), and a fine tavern. I’ll try and journey there in my next sojourn through the Sword Coast– if you hear that I stay away because I am frightened of kobolds or some evil presence in the mountains, I am here to say that is not the case!
The Iron Throne
Gullykin
Independent merchants generally tend to be individuals who deal on face value and (at least reputed) honesty. They also tend to stay out of politics, other than currying the favor of whoever or whatever is currently in charge of their favorite watering holes and way stops. Merchants trust to their luck but hire mercenaries as protection, and enough of their goods get through to make
This small village of halflings is in the eastern part of the Baldur’s Gate region. I didn’t make it there after I heard about the kobolds around Nash... I mean, because I’ve never been partial to halfling holes. But the halflings have at least one temple, so it might be worth your while to have a look, if you’re out that way, that is.

                                             52
53
them profitable. The rulership of the lands they pass through is up to others, including retired members of their craft, whom they trust to give them a fair shake.
plots of the Red Wizards are so involved that it is often difficult to determine where one ends and another begins. The Red Wizards are many things, but one of the things that they are not is subtle. Swaggering, boastful, loud, insulting, and dangerous, yes, but never subtle. It takes great control for a Red Wizard to affect personal humility, no matter how slight, or tolerate even the most subtle reproach to the superiority of the Thayvian people. Despite this, there are always (apparently) new Red Wizards to challenge adventurers.
An apparent exception to this is the Iron Throne, a mysterious organization which has been operating over the past few decades. Despite its long existence, little is known of its purpose or the identity of its backers. The Iron Throne operates through agents, mostly low-level thugs and brigands who have only recently taken legitimate employment and entered into the
service of the merchant roster. The turnover is apparently high, since Iron Throne agents often seem to lapse into their old ways. The Throne denies all complicity in any criminal acts by their agents, and replaces them regularly. The Iron Throne wishes to maintain a patina of respectability, regardless of how thin. Recently, the veneer has become thin indeed, for the Iron Throne has been charged with attempted assassination of competition, extortion, and thuggery, trading weapons to humanoid tribes, and trafficking in smokepowder, poison, and contraband. There have been frequent reports of conflicts between Iron Throne caravans and agents and those sponsored by the Zhentarim. The Iron Throne has recently been banished for a year from acting within Cormyr, and many suspect them of branching out to new locales.
The Shadow Thieves
The masters of the Iron Throne are at present unknown, and have to this date resisted all attempts to magically divine their identities or intentions. This indicates some level of magical ability or protection on their parts, and rumors are rampant. Some say that the Iron Throne members are secretly agents of the Zhentarim, or of Cormyr, and previous actions against those groups are only to hide their trail. Some claim that a god is involved, such as Cyric or an even darker power (if such a thing is possible). Other rumors point to undead beholders, expired deities, sentinent lizards, or pale-blue sea giants as the true masters of the merchant company and the secret of its power. The truth remains to be seen.
The Shadow Thieves are a wide-ranging guild of thieves, spies, and assassins who perform particularly dangerous, evil- aligned, and lucrative ventures. Their activities, unlike those of most thieving guilds, are not limited to a single city, and they range the length of the Sword Coast from Luskan to Calimport. A group directly opposed to the Lords of Waterdeep and all their allies, the Shadow Thieves are based in Athkatla, in Amn (south of Baldur’s Gate), where they have a massive training complex and a testing ground for the assassins they sponsor. This group was once the thieves guild of Waterdeep, until they were driven out of that city by the Lords of Waterdeep. The Shadow Thieves have sponsored an assassins guild in Athkatla with the eventual aim of slaying all of the Lords of Waterdeep. In the meantime, this secretive organization appears to have reached some sort of agreement with the merchant lords of Amn, who would benefit from turmoil in their trade rival, Waterdeep (and perhaps also
wish to avoid being on the assassins’ list of targets themselves). Under this pact the merchant lords leave the Shadow Thieves alone and are in turn left alone. The Shadow Thieves operate up and down the Sword Coast; their trademark is a black silk mask impaled upon a stiletto blade (usually used in assassinations, or left behind at the scene if a garrotte or poison is employed instead). No names, descriptions, or even numbers of Shadow Thieves are known; extremely experienced operators are thought to be few.
The Red Wizards
The Red Wizards are the rulers of Thay, and the powerful ruling Zulkirs of that land are chosen from among their numbers. The Red Wizards are abroad throughout the Realms as spies and agents of their kingdom. Their actions are supposedly for the good of their home government, but each Red Wizard has his or her own agenda to pursue. The stated goal of the Red Wizards is to establish Thay as the superior political and magical force in the Realms. The Red Wizards encountered in the Realms may be working toward this end, advancing their own causes, or seeking to discredit others, including other Red Wizards. The Byzantine
The Zhentarim
The Black Network of the Zhentarim is a not-so-secret group of mages, priests, and warriors devoted to the task of dominating trade, and therefore power, throughout the Heartlands region. To that end they work to achieve the downfall of an ever-increasing list of opponents, including the Dalelands, the Harpers, rival Moonsea cities, the Cult of the Dragon, Cormyr, Sembia, and anyone else who gets in their way. That which cannot be

                                             54
55
infiltrated and controlled must be cowed into obedience or destroyed.
worth to their owners, and paying extravagant prices. It is said that the Mages of Halruaa seek the perfect components for their mighty spells, while others say the act of trading is merely a cover for darker, more sinister acts committed when the ship is in port. What is known is that every sailor on these ships has magical abilities.
The Black Network is active throughout the Heartlands, but currently has three major bases of operations. Darkhold has been established as a base within the Far Hills (a few week’s east of Baldur’s Gate), and stands as a terminus in the Western Heartlands for caravans from the northern, southern, and eastern Realms. The Citadel of the Raven, on the borders of Thar, is a major military base as well. The third headquarters, and birthplace of the organization, Zhentil Keep, has been less influential over the years owing to the rise of the church of Cyric. Despite having a major figure in the church in their employ, the Zhentarim have been less than effective in dominating the new faith, in contrast to the degree of control they had over the church of Bane. As a result, most of the daily deviltry of the Black Network comes from the other two locations, which have the added advantage of having no native civilian population to get in the way (or lead a revolt).
It has been increasingly apparent that the Mages have a second set of operatives at their command who work more quietly within the great trading cities of the North and the Heartlands. These are shopkeepers, merchants, and common traders who act as the eyes and ears of the Halruaans, keeping abreast of new developments, particularly the appearance of powerful items of magic. Such artifacts are regularly sought out by the Halruaans, though whether to research them, destroy them, or merely keep them out of the hands of others is unknown. It is known that often after a powerful relic has been unearthed, the city where it appeared receives a visit from the great floating ships of the Mages of Halruaa.
Trade is a major component of the Zhentarim’s income, and they are not limited morally to the transport of ores and finished goods – they also do business in poisons, contraband, weapons, and slaves. Conquest is also high on the Zhentarim agenda, often using the forces of Zhentil Keep or another catspaw such as Voonlar or Llorkh. They also make extensive use of humanoid tribes and mercenaries, usually promising payment with the spoils of pillage after the battle. The chief intent in battle is to punish enemies or weaken rivals, and it is usually implemented after failure to take over the community from within.
Caution is advised when dealing with any of these factions. I fear some may be even more influential than Volo indicates. –Elminster
The Mages of Halruaa
A rising presence in Faerûn comes from the South, from the mystical and near-legendary land of Halruaa. This land is reputed to be controlled by powerful wizards, and wizardry there is incorporated into common use. It is a land where castles float on the breeze, water runs uphill, and even the meanest scullery maid knows a few cantrips to make her job go smoother. The true nature of Halruaa is best described by those who have pierced its mountainous borders.
In Faerûn, these mages are best known for their flying ships, which are slung beneath great bags filled with volatile gases. These flying ships are the hallmark of the Halruaan mage, and often appear off the coasts of many port cities in the Realms, approaching from the water, in the manner of standard craft, but remaining ”above it all.” The merchant-mages who control these crafts seem above it all as well, dealing in few items, often of little

                                              56
57
Major Characters of the
students and allies include some of the most powerful good individuals in the realms, including some of the Lords of Waterdeep; the Simbul, ruler of Aglarond; and the group known as the Harpers.
Sword Coast Drizzt Do’Urden
See above summary for more people – particularly the Dukes of Baldur’s Gate and other notables in that fair city. These below are a few of note that I also wanted to mention to you, dear readers –Volo
*Though this may be only his own opinion, it is often voiced in his discussions with others –Volo
(Dritst Doe-URR-den) Drizzt the dark elf (Chaotic Good, drow elf male, ranger 16th level). A renegade drow ranger who has escaped the oppressive regime of his underground homeland, Drizzt Do’Urden is among the most famous of drow in the Realms owing to his deeds on the surface. He may be found abroad while engaged in acts of daring, particularly in rolling back the tribes of goblins and evil humans in the North. His fame and hatred of his former homeland has made him a target of other drow who hope to earn favor with their evil goddess Lloth by killing the renegade. Drizzt wears mithril chain mail +4, a gift of King Bruenor. He wields two magical scimitars simultaneously. These scimitars are Icingdeath, a frostbrand +3, and Twinkle, a defender +5, which glows when enemies are near. His most prized possession is a figurine of wondrous power of an onyx panther. The panther’s name is Guenhwyvar. He doesn’t use the panther unless severely taxed, as he is limited to using it for a certain period of time each day.
Volothamp Geddarm
Elminster
As a result, he is a fountain of knowledge on subjects and more than willing to share the juiciest portions with whomever will listen. As a result, Volo must move around a lot in order to stay alive, which adds to his storehouse of information on geography, Heroes may find Volo anywhere in the Realms, usually on the run from this irate wizard or that angry innkeeper.
(El MINN-ster) Elminster the Sage (Chaotic Good, human male, wizard 29th level). The exact age of Elminster is unknown and his year of birth unrecorded. From his tales, it is suspected he learned his magical arts at the feet of Arkhon the Old, who died in what is now Waterdeep over 500 years ago, and he may have been in Myth Drannor near that magical realm’s final days. The exact nature of these claims remains unproven, but most Realms natives who know him consider Elminster an eternal force in the world. The Sage currently makes his abode in the tiny farm community of Shadowdale, living in a two-story house overlooking a fishpond with his aide and scribe, Lhaeo. He is often abroad, both elsewhere in the Realms and in other planes, where he hobnobs with the great and the not-so-great in a relentless pursuit of knowledge. Elminster may be the most knowledgeable and well-informed individual in the Realms*. His areas of specialization are the Realms and its people, ecologies
The price of fame, or infamy? – Elminster
of various creatures, magical items and their histories, and the known planes of existence. Elminster no longer tutors or works for hire save in the most pressing cases. He seems to prize his independence and solitude, but on several occasions has opened his tower to newcomers and visitors. Many of Elminster’s former
Bentley (Chaotic Good, gnome male, illusionist 10th level/thief 10th level). This industrious gnome illusionist abandoned life as an adventurer to run the Friendly Arm Inn in a keep he and adventurer comrades seized and cleared of monsters some 20 seasons ago. A clever, alert, curly-haired innkeeper who has a habit of humming when deep in thought and of scratching his large nose when concerned, Bentley’s always a step ahead of troublemakers and misfortune. A veteran traveling Coast merchant called him “a master anticipator.” Aided by his wife Gellana, he has made the Arm a safe, friendly, clean, well- defended spot, a ”must” stop for overland travelers. There are persistent rumors that Bentley sponsors adventuring bands and is involved in half a dozen covert schemes or shady merchant cabals. He certainly never seems short of money. On several occasions he’s hired mercenaries to bolster his defenses in the dead of winter or hired wizards to teleport needed items from far- off cities.
Volo (Chaotic Good, Human Male, Wizard 5th level). A roguish magician known for his neatly trimmed beard, stylish beret and acid tongue, Volo is a feature throughout the Realms – a brief feature, since his honesty in reporting often puts him at odds with the local merchants, constabulatory, and wizards. He has written a number of works, including a popular series of guides to various cities and Volo’s Guide to All Things Magical, a suppressed work dealing with magic “for the common people.” Volo is an eminent sage who concerns himself with wizards and with the geography and lore of the Realms.
Eminent indeed! – Elminster
Bentley Mirrorshade, Friendly Arm Inn

                                                 58
59
Gellana Mirrorshade, Friendly Arm Inn
First Reader, Tethtoril, Candlekeep
Gellana (Neutral Good, gnome female, priest 10th level). This quiet, observant priestess of Garl Glittergold runs the Temple of Wisdom in the walled inn community known as the Friendly Arm and helps her husband Bentley run the inn as a safe, secure place. Where Bentley is an expert at sniffing out the schemes of living folk and seeing what they’ll need, try, and want, Gellana takes a longer view and is always looking at the larger picture. She ordered and oversaw the digging of deeper wells for the inn’s water supply and the rigging of secondary pumps in case the main ones fail or are wrecked by orcs. She also planned the inn gardens, adding window boxes and rooftop beds to the ground plots, and making all garden locations produce food or herbs for the inn kitchens. Gellana welcomes humans to her worship services, and has made many converts. She has also become something of a folk hero among gnomes in western Faerûn as ”the quiet and true power behind a gnome who made it.” Gnome mothers often speak of her to their daughters as someone they should emulate if they’d like to share as large a slice of success.
Tethtoril (Lawful Good, human male, priest of
Mystra, 18th level). This tall, impressive, and soft-
spoken man is often mistaken for the Keeper of
Tomes of Candlekeep. He is more intelligent, regal,
and sensitive than his superior Ulraunt, by far – and
Ulraunt knows it. Yet Tethtoril is unfailingly loyal,
and diligent in his duties, often anticipating troubles
and preparing beforehand to spare Candlekeep
troubles – or Ulraunt any embarrassment. Most Holy
Mystra often whispers to Tethtoril in his dreams,
bidding him to do this or that – and in this way has led him to unearth spells from forgotten tomes; kept Elminster, Khelben, and the Harpers tolerated in Candlekeep; and prevented Ulraunt from being seduced by darker powers (most recently, Cyric).
Most Radiant of Lathander, Kelddath Ormlyr, Beregost
Thalantyr (Neutral Good, human male, wizard 17th level). An archmage of note, Thalantyr is a courtly, solitary man who enjoys walks in the countryside while armed with his staff of power. He dwells in a guarded estate known as High Hedge, west of Beregost. Once an adventurer who eagerly sought the lost magic of Netheril in crumbling ruins, he’s now retired. And although he’s left the perils of that profession, he’ll help other adventurers with advice and spells for fees. He’ll also warn them that they may find a lot more than they intended to, as he did – but won’t be much more specific. One gathers from long conversations with him that he met some sort of horrible monster and was enslaved for a time, escaping only through luck. He is said to have won his freedom with spellbooks and other magical relics of Netheril that make him self-supporting, so that he need not travel the planes or go adventuring in Toril any longer.
Kelddath (Neutral Good, human male priest, 16th level). Governor of Beregost and high priest of the temple to Lathander there, Kelddath is a patient, energetic supporter of local improvement. He’s always advising or lending money to new local businesses and to farmers trying to expand or modernize their holdings. His temple troops police the town attentively and try to prevent adventurers and others from exploring local ruins. Any rowdiness or lawlessness is swiftly and harshly dealt with. Kelddath wants Beregost to have a reputation for being the safest Sword Coast town in order to encourage trade and travel.
Taerom “Thunderhammer” Fuiruim, Beregost
Taerom (Neutral Good, human male, fighter 5th level). This master armorer has his own smithy in Beregost and is a smith whose work is admired even by dwarves. Though he’s grown white-haired with the passing of years, he’s still an active, burly giant of a man. He keeps to himself, working at his forge, but can slay gnolls with a single blow of his12-foot-long iron staff. Taerom has often made items fine enough for wizards to enchant, but these days he’s more apt to make small, useful things like hooks, locks, hinges, and coffers. He sports magnificent muttonchop whiskers and stands almost 7 feet tall, with shoulders almost 4 feet broad. He has a distinctive rolling stride.
Keeper of the Tomes, Ulraunt, Candlekeep
Thalantyr the Conjurer, Beregost
Ulraunt (Lawful Neutral, human male, wizard 9th level). The head of fortified Candlekeep, Ulraunt is a proud scholar, one of the most learned – and one of the most haughty – people in all Faerûn. His sharp tongue, large nose, and dark-eyed, hawklike gaze have earned him the nickname ”the Old Buzzard” among acolytes down the years – a term that has even crept into general use in the Coast lands. Ulraunt has access to more spells than most wizards see in their lives, and he reportedly keeps

                                              60
61
in practice casting them in his private turret chamber and in caverns deep beneath Candlekeep. A secret passage is said to connect these heights and depths. He bears a magical staff of office rumored to be a staff of the magi with extra, extremely potent powers. Ulraunt and those among the Great Readers who are wizards have access to spell scrolls all over Candlekeep – scrolls hidden behind wooden panels and within false tomes. Ulraunt’s chief interest is acquiring ever more information. His aims in life are unknown beyond making Candlekeep the seat of a land of scholars and a power on the political stage of Faerûn. Several tales link him with young ladies of various noble houses, Waterdeep, and Tethyr in his earlier years – and there’s a newer rumor tying him romantically to some of the icy-cold, haughty elven ladies who come to the Sword Coast from Evermeet.
Some Monsters of the Sword Coast
This is by no means a complete list of the monsters you will encounter, my friends; there are many more in the area around Baldur’s Gate. These are a few of the most representative, at least for the safer areas.
You’ll probably run into these first, and if you’re lucky you won’t see any more !
Try not to venture too far away from the taverns, friends! –Volo
Black bear
A rather common omnivorous mammal, the bear tends to avoid humans unless provoked. Exceptions to this rule can be a most unfortunate occurrence.
Bears are, in general, large and powerful animals which are found throughout the world’s temperate and cooler climates. With dense fur protecting them from the elements and powerful claws protecting them from other animals, bears are the true rulers of the animal kingdom in the areas where they live.
The so-called black bear actually ranges in color from black to light brown. It is smaller than the brown bear and the most widespread species by far.
Brown bear
The brown bear, of which the infamous grizzly is the most well known variety, is a bear of very aggressive disposition. Brown bears are more carnivorous than their smaller cousins, the black bears. The grizzly in particular will often bring down large game such as deer and elk.
Other types of bears have been seen upon the Sword Coast, but most species mind their own business unless provoked! –Volo
Carrion crawler
The carrion crawler is a scavenger of subterranean areas, feeding primarily upon carrion. However, when such food becomes scarce or when it is threatened, the carrion crawler will attack and kill living creatures.
The crawler looks like a cross between a giant green cutworm and a cephalopod. Like so many other hybrid monsters, the

                                             62
63
carrion crawler may well be the result of genetic experimentation by a mad, evil wizard.
will quickly become evident that ghasts are present, for they exude a carrion stench.
The monster’s head is covered with a tough hide, but the body is not well protected. The monster is accompanied by a rank, fetid odor which often gives warning of its approach.
Ghoul
A drunken adventurer claimed one of these somehow immobilized the party he was traveling with and slowly devoured them... Grisly! –Volo
Ghouls are undead creatures, once human, who now feed on the flesh of corpses. Although the change from human to ghoul has deranged and destroyed their minds, ghouls have a terrible cunning which enables them to hunt their prey most effectively.
Dryad
Ghouls are vaguely recognizable as once having been human, but have become horribly disfigured by their change to ghouls. The tongue becomes long and tough for licking marrow from cracked bones, the teeth become sharp and elongated, and the nails grow strong and sharp like claws.
Dryads are beautiful, intelligent tree sprites. They are as elusive as they are alluring, however, and dryads are rarely seen unless taken by surprise – or when they wish to be spotted.
The dryad’s exquisite features, delicate and finely chiseled, are much like an elf maiden’s. Dryads have high cheek bones and amber, violet, or dark green eyes.
Giant spiders
Dryads often appear clothed in a loose, simple garment. The clothing they wear is the color of the oak grove in the season they appear. They speak their own tongue, as well as the languages of elves, pixies, and sprites. Dryads can also speak with plants.
Spiders are aggressive predators, dwelling both above and below ground. Most are poisonous and bite prey before devouring them, because unconscious victims are easier to carry to a lair.
Ettercap
Spiders have eight legs and eight eyes. They usually fit into two categories: web-spinners, which have bulbous abdomens and sleek legs; and hunting spiders, which have smaller bodies, larger heads and fangs, and hairy bodies and legs.
Ettercaps are ugly bipedal creatures that get along very well with all types of giant spiders. These creatures of low intelligence are exceedingly cruel, cunning, and are skilled in setting traps – very deadly traps – much like the spiders that often live around them.
Most giant spiders are simply much bigger versions of the web- spinning large spiders. Their poison causes immediate death if the victim fails the saving throw.
Ettercaps stand around six feet tall, even with their stooping gait and hunched shoulders. The creatures have a short, spindly legs, long arms that reach nearly to their ankles, and large pot-bellies. The hands of ettercaps have a thumb and three long fingers that end in razor sharp claws. Their bodies are covered by tufts of thick, wiry, black hair, and their skin is dark and thick. Ettercap’s heads are almost equine in shape, but they have large reptilian eyes, usually blood-red in color, and large fangs, one protruding downward from each side of the mouth. The mouth itself is large and lined with very sharp teeth.
An Amnian traveler once shared with me a frightening tale of a spider the size of a horse with swords for arms and a plated hide! ...surely there are varieties even fiercer still! –Volo
Ghast
The first impression of gibberlings is of a writhing mass of fur and flesh in the distant moonlit darkness. The pandemonium is actually a mass of pale, hunchbacked humanoids, with pointed canine ears, black manes surrounding their hideous, grinning faces. Their eyes are black, and shine with a maniacal gleam.
These creatures are so like ghouls as to be completely indistinguishable from them, and they are usually found only with a pack of ghouls. When a pack of ghouls and ghasts attacks it
Gibberling
They come screaming, jabbering, and howling out of the night. Dozens, maybe hundreds, of hunchbacked, naked humanoids swarming forward. They have no apparent thought of safety, subtlety, or strategy, leaving others with little hope of stopping their mass assault. Then, having come and killed, the gibberlings move on, seemingly randomly, back into the night.

                                             64
65
Gnoll
found serving as mercenaries in the ranks of orc tribes, evil clerics, or gnolls.
Gnolls are large, evil, hyena-like humanoids that roam about in loosely organized bands.
They mingle freely with giants and trolls. Adult ogres stand 9 to 10 feet tall and weigh 300 to 350 pounds. Their skin colors range from a dead yellow to a dull black-brown, and (rarely) a sickly violet. Their warty bumps are often of a different color – or at least darker than their hides. Their eyes are purple with white pupils. Teeth and talons are orange or black. Ogres have long, greasy hair of blackish-blue to dull dark green. Their odor is repellent, reminiscent of curdled milk. Dressing in poorly cured furs and animal hides, they care for their weapons and armor only reasonably well. It is common for ogres to speak orcish, troll, stone giant, and gnoll, as well as their own guttural language. A typical ogre’s life span is 90 years.
While the body of a gnoll is shaped like that of a large human, the details are those of a hyena. They stand erect on two legs and have hands that can manipulate as well as those of any human. They have greenish gray skin, darker near the muzzle, with a short reddish gray to dull yellow mane.
Hobgoblin
Hobgoblins are a fierce humanoid race that wage a perpetual war with the other humanoid races. They are intelligent, organized, and aggressive.
The typical hobgoblin is a burly humanoid standing at least 6 feet tall. Their hairy hides range from dark reddish-brown to dark gray. Their faces show dark red or red-orange skin. Large males have blue or red noses. Hobgoblin eyes are either yellowish or dark brown while their teeth are yellow. Their garments tend to be brightly colored, often bold, blood red. Any leather is always tinted black. Hobgoblin weaponry is kept polished and repaired.
Some more advanced ogres can even cast spells!
–Volo
Kobold
The ogrillon is a species of half-ogre, being the fruit of an (unnatural) union between ogres and orcs. The ogrillon displays the general tendencies of its larger cousin with some exceptions. It is even more brutish and violent, and it normally learns to speak only ogrish and a handful of words of common.
Kobolds are a cowardly, sadistic race of short humanoids that vigorously contest the human and humanoid races for living space and food. They especially dislike gnomes and attack them on sight.
The ogrillon is the about the size of an orc, and closely resembles one. One in ten is born with features and coloration very similar to those of ogres: purple eyes with white pupils, black teeth, yellowish skin with dull, dark green hair. The skin of an ogrillon of either type is covered with small horn plates, giving it a superior armor class and enabling it to fight without weapons. An ogrillon disdains armor and most other material items, retaining only a handful of gold pieces as a treasured belonging. It is uncertain why they would keep gold, except perhaps for luck. Perhaps we’ll never know.
Barely clearing 3 feet in height, kobolds have scaly hides that range from dark, rusty brown to a rusty black. They smell of damp dogs and stagnant water. Their eyes glow like a bright red spark and they have two small horns ranging from tan to white. Because of the kobolds’ fondness for wearing raggedy garb of red and orange, their non-prehensile rat-like tails, and their language (which sounds like small dogs yapping), these fell creatures are often not taken seriously. This is often a fatal mistake, for what they lack in size and strength they make up in ferocity and tenacity.
Some have also noted small humanoids called ‘tasloi’ and ‘xvarts.’ While all are nearly harmless met singly, they always attack in packs. This is a good reason to travel accompanied, dear reader, if
Sirine
Ogre
not just for the company.
–Volo
Sirines are beautiful, human-like females, at home in any aquatic environment. They have human skin tones ranging to a light yellow-green, and their hair can be almost any color, though
silver and dark green are the most common. Sirines have beautiful figures and wear scanty clothing at best.
Ogres are big, ugly, greedy humanoids that live by ambushes, raids, and theft. Ill-tempered and nasty, these monsters are often
Most sirines are antisocial, so they try to drive intruders away,
A rather melodramatic description of (admittedly formidable) Ogre-Magi, which are no longer as rare as the casual traveler might wish. –Elminster
Ogrillon

                                                           66
67
with evil sirines taking stronger measures. Other sirines are hungry for social interaction, and try to lure male humans or humanoids to join them for a time.
Time in The Realms
Sirines speak their own language and the language of the nearest intelligent races. They can breathe water and air, and they have infravision to a range of 120 feet.
Daytime is described by the use of a 24-hour clock, as the day of the world of Toril is 24 hours long. For simplicity the AM (for time before noon) and PM (for time after noon) conventions are used herein.
Skeleton
The following calendar is common enough to apply to all regions within the Realms (especially the Sword Coast). The year consists of 360 days: 12 months of exactly 30 days each. Three ten-day weeks are in each month, but herein we refer to days as they relate to the month (that is, one through 30, of a specific month, rather than specific days of the week). The months are summarized in the table below. Each month’s name is followed by a colloquial description of that month, plus the roughly corresponding month of the Gregorian calendar in parentheses.
All skeletons are magically animated undead monsters, created as guardians or warriors by powerful evil wizards and priests.
Skeletons appear to have no ligaments or musculature which would allow movement. Instead, the bones are “magically joined“ together during the casting of an Animate Dead spell. Skeletons have no eyes or internal organs.
Be wary of all undead beasts. Aside from the ghouls, ghasts, and skeletons listed here, there are animated corpses, warrior skeletons, and even revived wolves known as dread wolves. Some of the most powerful undead, such as the vampiric wolves, are not even affected by normal weaponry and require
Name
Colloquial Description
Gregorian Month
Wild dog
Ches Tarsakh Mirtul Kythorn Flamerule Eleasias Eleint Marpenoth Uktar Nightal
Of the Sunsets
Of the Storms The Melting
The Time of Flowers Summertide Highsun
The Fading Leafall
The Rotting
The Drawing Down
March April May June July August September October November December
magics in order to kill!
-Elminster
The Claw of Winter or the Claws of the Cold
Smaller than wolves, the appearance of the wild dog varies from place to place. Most appear very wolf-like, while others combine the looks of wolf and jackal.
Wolf
The wolf is a very active, cunning carnivore, capable of surviving in nearly every climate. Shrouded in mystery and suspicion, they are viewed as vicious killers that slaughter men and animals alike for the lack of better things to do.
Northern wolves exhibit colors from pure white to black. Southern wolves are reddish and brown in color. Although fur coloration vary with climate, all wolves have various features in common. They are characterized by powerful jaws; wide strong teeth; bushy tails; tall, strong ears; and round pupils. Their eyes, a gold or amber color, seem to have an almost empathic ability.
Years are referred to by numbers, using the system known as Dalereckoning (DR): Dalereckoning is taken from the year that humans were first permitted by the Elven Court to settle in the more open regions of the forests.
Worg
The wide variety of competing and often conflicting calendars causes no end of pain to the historian and the sage. Most use the Roll of Years, a system by which each year has its own personal name. Names for the years are known collectively as the Roll of
Worgs are an offshoot of wolf stock that have attained a degree of intelligence and tendency toward evil. Worgs have a primitive language and often serve as mounts of goblins.